Brazilian Religion & Faith in Democracy
================
Gustavo Arruda Franco

## Data

In the 1990s, several Latin American countries went through
re-democratization after long military dictatorships. Their potential
opening to a globalizing economy brought international attention the
region. In the negotiation process of an emerging MERCOSUL, the European
Commission funded the beginning of the **Latinobarometro** initiative.
The initiative followed the successful implementation of the annual
Eurobarometer survey in the 1970s, allied with local efforts to
understand public opinion in regards to democracy and authoritarianism.
Since then **Latinobarometro** has been yearly surveying around 18.000
people in 18 different countries, measuring the local political climate.
More information about this research initiative and the data used in
this analysis can be found freely available at their [official
website](https://www.latinobarometro.org/).

## Research Question

Fears of authoritarianism have been arising again throughout the
international landscape in the last few years. In Brazil more
specifically, the 2018 election of president Jair Bolsonaro has demanded
particular attention from social scientists and observers of democracy.
One of the most puzzling dimensions of this phenomenon has been the
touted alliance of fast rising Evangelical groups with the political
right-wing. **This brief analysis is meant to explore which are the
possible relationships between *religious affiliation* and *sentiments
towards democracy* in Brazil between the 2018 presidential election and
its previous one in 2013.** As a limitation, the Latinobarometro survey
is not especially focused in Brazil, which might carry deficiencies in
sampling compared to a large scale national survey of the same type. On
the other hand, at this point the survey carries expertise in tracking
political sentiment in the region for decades.

## Religious Backgrounds

![](Brazilian_Religion_Democracy_files/figure-gfm/religious_population-1.png)<!-- -->

  - This bar chart shows the proportion of three main religious
    categories in Brazil (my criterion here was proportions over 5%) in
    terms of total population, from 2013 to 2018.
  - The graph suggests a slight proportional growth of Evangelicals
    throughout the observed time span.

## Support to Democracy

![](Brazilian_Religion_Democracy_files/figure-gfm/democracy_support-1.png)<!-- -->

  - In overall terms, the three biggest religious classifications seem
    to be following similar trends.

  - The variation among years is high.

  - Strong support to democracy seems to have been substituted by
    political indifference among all three religious classifications.

  - The only possible exception might be the ‘No Religion’ group, whose
    strong support to democracy continued to increase between 2017 and
    2018 in contrast to the other two groups.

## Satisfaction with Democracy

![](Brazilian_Religion_Democracy_files/figure-gfm/democracy_satisfaction-1.png)<!-- -->

  - Subverting expectations, this graph suggests an increase in the
    average answer to a scale measuring satisfaction with democracy for
    all three religious classifications throughout the observed years.

  - Here again the three different religious groups seem follow a
    similar trend.

  - The Catholics might have gone back to a decrease in satisfaction
    with democracy earlier than its peers, between 2016 and 2017.

  - 2013 was a year distinguished by the explosion of large-scale
    protests, public discontentment with the then president Dilma
    Roussef of the center-left Workers Party, and the beginning of
    mainstream far-right political articulation. That could explain the
    perceptibly lower overall satisfaction around that time.

  - Between 2015 and 2016 the process of impeachment of Dilma Roussef
    unraveled with broad popular support, which could have helped to
    bounce back general satisfaction with the democratic regime.

## Conclusion

As it is often the case in the social sciences, categories are not
transparent and might have different readings in different contexts. An
issue we can speculate about the research design is the possible
inability of “satisfaction with democracy” scales to measure what has
been called “illiberal democracies” or “populist democracies”. People
might have different standards to evaluate a democratic regime. Thus
measuring their evaluations might get methodologically muddled with a
measure of their own standards, carrying difficulties for broader
conclusions about political sentiments towards authoritarian regimes.
Measures like these would be enriched by a better understanding of
evaluation processes taken by the studied population.

That leads to my initial research question about the relationship
between religious affiliation and sentiments towards democracy between
2013 and 2018. Accepting the presuppositions of the Latinobarometro,
there is *little suggestion* of significant variation among the biggest
three religious classifications.

At last, it could also be the case that political indifference itself is
more characteristic of current day Brazilian authoritarianism than
explicit individual authoritarian alignment.
